Hi, everyone.
My name is Pat Dirks.
I've been working on file systems
and file servers on the Mac ever
since the days when the most
excellent Mac 512KE supplanted
the 512 as the top of the heap.
So it's been a while,
and we've come a very, very long way.
We put together a talk to give
you some highlights of things
that you should be aware of when
you're using the file system,
mostly from an application perspective.
We are gonna go in a
little bit of background,
just enough to sort of put the stage
for all these things and run an anchor
for all these things to make sense.
We'll talk a little bit
about the BSD-level APIs,
but also about the
higher-level frameworks.
So what we're gonna focus on is how
to make your applications go faster,
basically how to make your
I/O go faster and how to work
better overall with the system,
particularly in light of some new
technologies that we're introducing,
extended attributes, ACLs,
that sort of thing.
We'll say a few words about monitoring
other ongoing things in the system,
kind of common areas that applications
often get bogged down doing things
that are unnecessarily wasteful.
So we'll try to hit all the
highlights and then we'll try to
leave lots of time for Q&A afterwards,
where we'll have the whole team up
and you can ask anything you like.
So, a bit of background on the kernel
and the BSD parts of the system.
There are actually a number
of different frameworks that
people access these APIs through.
There's the object-oriented Cocoa set
of frameworks that people use.
There's the familiar Carbon APIs.
And the low-level BSD APIs that
are the foundation for all of them.
And the thing to bear in mind is that
everything that is done in the system is
done at some point through some BSD API.
So, if you don't mind getting down
to the really nitty-gritty,
the BSD API will let you
do anything you want to do.
Inside the system, at the highest level,
is the virtual file system layer.
And that provides a common set
of system call interfaces to
all other parts of the system,
as well as providing some common
services like path name translation,
a certain amount of access checking,
NFS export service that are just
common to all layers of the system.
But beyond that,
it uses an extensible interface
to lower level specific
file system implementations.
and works with Buffer Cache and VM that
I'll say a few words more in a moment.
Because the buffer cache in,
I think it was Jaguar or maybe Panther,
was changed from a separate buffer
pool that set aside the VM system and
competed with VM for who had the correct
copy of something to a unified buffer
cache that coordinates with VM to make
sure that there's only one copy of your
data in the system at any one place.
And there's a set of code called UBC,
the Unified Buffer Cache,
that basically coordinates who owns
a given page at any given time and
swaps ownership between the two.
So the important thing is,
whatever there is of your data,
there's only one copy of it
floating around in the system.
Now, at the lowest level,
there's a few very
simple set of I/O calls.
There's open, close, read/write,
truncate, seek,
just the bare necessities.
And there's mmap,
which we'll talk about it in
some more length later on.
We have some basic metadata operations.
You can open a directory for reading.
You can read through it and get
some information on the various
items that are in a directory.
We'll talk about that
some more later too,
because that's another way that
you might want to be careful.
Stat is a basic call to get
some metadata on an item.
And then there's a few other calls.
We extended the basic BSD mechanism
a bit to support some of the things
that HFS had brought to Mac OS 9
when we first introduced Mac OS X.
You couldn't quite port all of the
existing Mac OS 9 functionality to
the BSD APIs that I just mentioned.
So we introduced a pair of calls,
getAddrList and setAddrList,
that let you do stat and chmod
things in a slightly different,
more expendable way.
And a new call, getDirEntriesAddr,
that probably few people call directly,
but is used by the frameworks
in the system to do efficient
enumeration of items in the same
way that getCatalogInfo did.
In addition, we introduce SearchFS,
which is an interesting API because
it lets you search the entire catalog
of a disk in more or less block order.
So the performance of SearchFS is
dramatically faster than doing a
complete treat reversal of every
single directory in the file system.
We added a few F-control selectors to let
you do things like pre-allocating space
on a disk and other things like that.
And new in the TIGER release,
and we'll talk a bit more about that,
are extended attributes and ACLs.
In general,
although I said you can do everything
at the lowest level in the BSD system,
you're probably best off using
the higher level frameworks,
Cocoa or Carbon, in the system.
Because the BSD level of APIs makes no
attempt to hide all the differences.
between the different file systems.
So if some file system doesn't
support a certain feature,
it's just not going to
work in the BSD call.
And frameworks like Carbon will
provide uniform access to things
like resource forks and even emulate
them if necessary on file systems
that don't directly support them.
So in general,
you're best off using the highest
level API that you can use.
So I'll say a bit more about
the extended attributes.
Extended attributes are new in Tiger.
The release that you have has
only a very limited implementation
of the extended attributes.
They're basically only supported
on the HFS file system.
But in Tiger, extended attributes will be
supported across all file systems.
They are, however,
going to be fragile in much the same way
that the resource fork has always been.
And one of the things I hope you'll take
away from this talk is that if you're
manipulating files in the file system,
if you're making copies of things,
if you're transferring things around,
you should be mindful that,
like a resource fork,
they may have extended
attributes associated with them,
and you should be
careful to preserve them.
While I'm on the subject
of the resource fork,
by the way, if your code still has any
references to file name/resource,
now is definitely the
release to get rid of that.
We have supported that for a while,
but it's not the way to refer things.
If you want to,
you can use . .name/resource.
The biggest trick is
always doing a safe-save.
Unfortunately, Exchange Files,
which was invented for
that purpose in Mac OS 9,
is not supported on all file
systems or all protocols.
Besides which,
you're going to have to be, in general,
careful to preserve extended
attributes and ACLs as well.
If you were here at 2 o'clock today,
you would have heard a talk about
the ACLs and what to do about that.
We have a few recommendations.
[Transcript missing]
Wherever possible,
if Exchange files are supported
and your document format is
a single straight data file,
the best way to do a save-save
is to do an Exchange files.
But you're always going to
have to have a fallback option,
and the best thing you can do,
if you've created the file correctly,
is to just do a rename in place.
If your document format is a bundle,
if it's really a directory with
files contained underneath there,
you can do one of two things.
Either create a complete
parallel directory in place,
and then rename one out
of the way and rename it.
It's not atomic, but it'll work.
And the other option is to
create the updated file somewhere
inside the top level directory so
they're invisible from the user,
and then using either
Exchange files or rename,
switch them in place with the
pieces that you're updating.
And only you can decide based on that.
And that's the only way you can
decide based on your application
which model makes most sense.
Now,
Some things to be aware of.
Locking support is unfortunately
not uniform across all file systems.
It's good practice to lock files that
you think there may be contention for,
but there will be file systems,
either local or network file systems,
that just don't support that.
Rename does not support file IDs.
That was one of the big advantages
that Exchange Files brought,
is that if you had an alias to a file,
Exchange Files would replace the data
while leaving the file ID intact,
and an alias would find it again.
That's one of the appeals
of using Exchange Files.
Fortunately,
alias data structures have some
additional resolution mechanisms
built in that will make it
possible to find the file,
even if the file ID is lost because you
used rename instead of Exchange Files.
But Exchange Files is still preferable.
And as I mentioned,
rename cannot atomically
replace directories.
In addition,
one thing to be careful about is that
not all network file systems allow
you to rename files that are open.
So if you have a choice about it,
it's best to close the file first,
or at least flush it,
before you try replacing it.
And on the subject of that, be careful.
Because on some file systems,
close may actually do a very
significant amount of I/O.
In a WebDAO file system, for instance,
it's not until close time
that the actual data is all
transferred over to the server.
There may also be systems that
don't actually guarantee that your
quota has been checked properly,
for instance, until the file is actually
closed and on disk.
So you should try closing the file
before you use it to replace data.
And if you can't close it,
at least call fsync on it to force
a flush of the data and check for
errors on both of those before
you allow the data to be replaced.
So a word about file copying,
and this is actually one of the
shortest sections of the talk.
We've had lots of requests over
the years to allow people access
to the Finder copy engine,
and that's what we're
introducing in Tiger.
So you'll actually get access--
Not directly to the finder's engine,
but to the same engine
that the finder uses.
But you'll be able to do copies
exactly the same way the finder does.
And if you can use this new FS file
operations API to transfer files around,
moving or copying, that will be by far
the best way to do it,
because we'll guarantee that that
does the best job possible on the
various file systems involved.
The API will let you do either
synchronous or asynchronous copies,
and you can set a callback routine to
be called at a rate that you specify
so that you can do whatever animation
you want to do to show the copy
in progress or anything like that.
It's very nice,
and that's what the Tiger Finder
is going to be using.
So that's an example where the highest
possible level of API is just ideal.
So, a few words about performance.
You may have more choices about
how to do I/O in Mac OS X and in
Tiger than you may have otherwise.
There are a few caveats
that apply generally.
Obviously, the fewer I/Os you do,
the better.
And the more you can aggregate
I/Os into a few large I/Os,
the better.
The kernel will, to some extent,
coalesce operations that you do
to make fewer larger operations
out of a few single ones.
It will do read-ahead caching
and write-behind caching,
so you may be picking up benefits
that you weren't even aware of.
There is something very specific,
mostly on HFS, about zero fill.
The Unix file semantics specify
that data that has not been
written should read back as zeros.
And the system goes out of its way
to make sure that that is true,
even on file systems like HFS,
which don't actually support
sparse file semantics.
So what that means is,
if you take a file and create
it and skip ahead 100K into the
file and start writing there,
and you try to read
something out of the middle,
the system will actually supply
zeros for all those areas and
write those on disk if necessary.
If you close the file,
only having written that last
little bit at 100K out there,
it will fill the intermediate
space on disk with zeros.
So that's another example of this.
So there's a significant
amount of I/O that you might
incur when you do close.
I have a few words about
zero fill later too.
Now in general,
there is a couple of different
ways that you can do I/O,
and we'll talk about them all in turn.
You can do standard
buffered reads and writes.
You can directly memory
map a file on disk,
anywhere on disk, into your address space
and access it that way.
You can do uncached, unbuffered I/O,
which is great if you're ripping
through very large data sets that
you have no reason to believe
will be touched again later.
And we're now introducing
support for true asynchronous
I/O in the kernel as well,
and that's another option
you may want to consider.
Now in the buffered read/write case,
it's the most general
of all the mechanisms.
You can transfer any amount of data to
any place you want in your address space.
There are some costs
associated with that.
The data is first transferred
into the buffer cache,
and then explicitly copied out of the
buffer cache into your application space,
dirtying a page in the process.
So you're incurring an extra copy
and you're dirtying the page.
But if you're reading
or writing small files,
and if you have no reason to think that
they might not be touched shortly after,
or if you really need the flexibility of
writing a small amount of data in a very
particular place in your address space,
this is the perfect mechanism to use.
And if you're just doing reads
and writes and doing nothing else,
this is the mechanism you're using.
By contrast, you can,
if you want to give up control
over the location of the data,
use memory mapped IO.
You can call MMP.
You have to call the low-level
BSD file system call.
There's no framework-level call for this.
But you can ask a system to map
a file in your address space,
and it will just appear.
You'll be given the address,
and you can access the data right there,
and it will be paged in
directly off the file on disk.
If you're reading in a file,
this is a great way to read it.
If you don't care where the data ends up,
you can just use your favorite beat
copy routine to read your file.
There's only a single copy made of
the data because the system doesn't
have to relocate it to the place
where you requested it be put.
Everything is left clean,
so if the pages need to be reused later,
they can simply be tossed.
They don't need to be
written out to swap space.
And although you can
overwrite data that way,
and it'll be paged out to the file,
you can't actually
extend the file that way.
That's the only limitation.
The big caveat on using memory
mapped I/O is that if you
encounter any I/O errors because,
say, it was on some removable disk
and the disk was removed,
or it was on a network file
and the network connection
was broken or something,
it's as if you hit a bad RAM chip.
I mean, you get a memory access error.
So it's a little bit more severe
than just getting an error
back on some I/O transfer.
You may want to keep that in mind and
limit disk type of operation to local,
non-removable media.
But with that caveat in mind,
it may be an attractive way to do I/O,
and it's very clean.
Some of the benefits of doing
that kind of I/O can also be had
by doing direct uncached I/O.
You can call fcontrol in the system
to request that I/O to a certain
file descriptor is done uncached,
and the system will take
advantage as much as possible
[Transcript missing]
The system cache is filled with
pages from your application,
or pages from other files
that you've touched,
or pages from the disk
structures that you're hitting.
You don't end up forcing them all
out of memory just because you're
reading some multi-megabyte data file.
So it's something to think about.
And there are ways that you can do
uncached I/O from the Carbon framework,
for instance.
We'll show that in a minute.
Async I/O is a standard API that we're
introducing support for in Tiger.
It's a complete implementation
of the standard POSIX async I/O.
You can initiate async I/O requests,
you can get notified by
a variety of mechanisms.
The I/Os are handed down
to the kernel in parallel,
so in theory they could proceed
in parallel to some extent.
And if you're calling the
Carbon PB Read Fork Async
or PB Write Fork Async,
you can specify explicitly that you want
the system to do concurrent async I/O.
By default,
the Carbon framework actually emulates
async I/O by having a separate thread
that is introduced by the system.
The I/O is then sent to the kernel to
take care of the I/Os while the rest
of your process is allowed to proceed.
And so things are essentially
single-threaded on the async side.
But if you want, you can now specify that
the system should do true
concurrent asynchronous I/O,
and it will get done that way.
[Transcript missing]
The system goes out of its way to
fill pages with zeros if necessary.
It also tries to defer
that as much as possible.
It tracks in memory what
is actually being written,
and it's not as simple as
skipping around and doing
I/O ahead in a non-sequential way.
It will guarantee that you
end up doing writes of zeros,
but it does introduce that possibility,
and if you can possibly write
your files out sequentially,
you'll be that much better off.
You can use allocate instead
of setEOF to allocate space
without forcing zero fills,
because setEOF actually would move the
EOF of the file out on disk and would
force zero fills of areas that you don't
actually write as part of that write.
Allocate simply reserves
the space in advance.
Allocate is not supported
on all file systems,
so you should just ignore
any errors you get,
because the write will allocate
the space as it goes anyway.
But calling allocate is a good idea,
and it's a better way to do it.
idea than calling setEOF.
Finally, if the file you're writing
is just a scratch file,
and you're writing it
randomly in different places,
so you're going to be
leaving lots of holes,
truncate the file to
zero before you close it.
Because that will preclude the
system from writing any zeros
out to disk on data that you're
going to just throw away anyway.
So if you have a scratch file,
and you're going to delete it
as soon as you close it anyway,
truncate it to zero first and
make sure you may have skipped
any zero fill that the system
might have to introduce for you.
A few words about directory enumeration,
which is another area that lots
of apps can spend lots of time.
You can call the raw BSD, read dir,
and stat calls on full paths.
You can use get catalog info in
the Carbon framework to get the
equivalent information out of stat.
There are new calls that were introduced.
The get their entries at,
or I referred to earlier,
are the BSD level call of it.
The get catalog info bulk is the
Carbon equivalent of that call,
and it will enumerate a directory
and collect the metadata
that you request as it goes.
The big way that you can save there is
the call actually has a field which info,
which specifies which fields in the
metadata you're actually interested in.
And for some file systems that
would otherwise end up emulating
some of the data or go through
contortions to generate some version
or derive some version of the data,
if you don't actually care
about some of the information,
you can indicate that by setting
the which info carefully.
And if you set that to as
small a set as possible,
the system will only collect together
as much metadata as is absolutely
necessary to satisfy the request.
Finally, the file system SearchFS has a
Carbon equivalent of catalog search.
It's an interesting mechanism that if
you're going to do a very large search
of essentially the whole disk anyway,
may be a far better way
of searching the data.
It's surprisingly fast.
In about 3-4 seconds you can
search an enormously large hard
disk catalog in its entirety,
and you can search for matches based on
a whole slew of metadata parameters or
file name substrings or things like that.
So if you're scanning a volume,
use SearchFS.
Don't do a treat reversal of the
whole thing starting from the root.
Think carefully about how you access
data and make sure that you choose
an appropriate mechanism for the
type of access that you're doing,
or perhaps change the way you
access data or write data to
better suit the mechanism and avoid
zero-fill on file systems like HFS.
There's a great quote that says,
"More sins are committed in the
name of optimization." However,
illusory than in actual code,
and that's very true.
If you're going to set about
optimizing your application,
analyze it first and make sure you find
the true hotspots in your application
before you go wild introducing some
new caching scheme or something because
you're convinced that this part of the
code is what's actually really slow,
and instead end up creating a
much larger memory footprint that
costs you in the first place.
performance when it
should have gained you.
If you're porting an
app from another system,
this is a good time to consider.
How you're actually hitting
the disk in the file system.
And some things that you may think
are cheap are in fact expensive,
and some things that would
have been expensive on other
systems are in fact quite cheap.
So this is a good time to revisit
some of the fundamental assumptions
that you may have in your data.
And speaking of assumptions,
don't make assumptions about the
speed of accessing some of these
things because innocent things like
preferences could easily be located
across the net on an NFS server
that may have crashed a minute ago,
for instance.
And what you think is a very quick
access to refresh your preferences
or something could potentially
take a long amount of time.
So be careful about what you assume.
Now,
say a few words about security and ACLs,
which are both new in the Tiger release.
You're by now probably
familiar with the STANDEX,
UNIX permissions model that
Mac OS X has supported all this time.
There's a single owner, a single group,
and three categories
of access for each one:
read, write, and execute.
There is a slight wrinkle in that we
allow the ignoring of who actually
owns a file on removable media,
and we do that by default.
But this is the basic model.
Access Control List, change all that.
Instead of having one owner and
one group and one others category,
you can invent as many
categories as you want.
And you can build up
a large list of ACES,
Access Control Entries,
that specify for individual categories
what they're allowed to do or
what they're not allowed to do.
And the system takes the whole list
of things into account before falling
back to the standard POSIX permissions.
So, it's very powerful and it lets you do
some of the things that AFP servers,
for instance, let you do,
where owners and groups
can each be associated with
their own group of access.
As owner or as group.
If you were at the 2 o'clock ACLS talk,
you saw that the group mechanism
has been greatly expanded.
The system is no longer limited
to fixed 16 groups per user.
It has given up on the idea
of trying to pre-enumerate the
groups that every user belongs to.
Instead,
there is a very flexible user level
group membership demon that the
system consults to determine which
users are members of which groups
dynamically and cache those results.
As a result, there are things possible
that were not easily before,
which is to have groups
that contain other groups,
for instance,
and groups that are completely determined
over the network in a very flexible way.
That's great stuff.
The ACL API is based on the
POSIX standard proposal that was not
adopted and has since been withdrawn,
but it's very much based on that.
And the actual permissions,
rather than being strictly the
POSIX read/write/execute model,
are a much more flexible,
much more fine-grained
set of permissions that,
for instance,
separate control over metadata
extended attributes from
control over the data of a file.
So it would be conceivable, for instance,
to have a set of images, photos,
that are read-only documents whose
metadata you can control and set your
own keywords on and things like that.
So what you can and cannot do
has become much more flexible.
Besides more flexible control over
the appearance of a single file,
there's also more flexible
control over the metadata and the
directory structures themselves.
There's ways that you can inherit
access control information from a
parent to a file that gets created.
There are separate controls over
the ability to control items within
a directory without regard for the
access controls on the item itself.
There's a lot of new stuff there.
There's a session tomorrow at 5:00.
Not sure where,
about the extended metadata APIs.
There was an session today at 2 o'clock.
I'll have references to all those later.
So finally,
notification is another area that an
app can easily spend lots of cycles,
perhaps unnecessarily.
The obvious way you might go about
seeing whether something changed,
if you have a folder that people can
drop plugins into or something like that,
is to periodically poll and see if the
mod date of that directory has changed.
That will work,
but you're spending time even when
nothing's happening in the system.
One improvement on that
is the whole FN subscribe,
FN notify mechanism that's been around.
But a much nicer solution that
we introduced support for is KQs.
And I'll say a few words about KQs.
The basic model of KQs was
derived from the observation that
applications spending lots of time
in basically a select loop or pull,
the problems are not fundamentally
different between the two,
are very wasteful just in the system
call overhead to do those things.
And so KQs were introduced to give
a model where instead of specifying,
like on a select,
the set of file descriptors that
you're interested in data being
ready for on the select call itself,
you would create a KQ and you're
giving back a file descriptor
like an open file would be.
And then you call K event to specify
the set of file descriptors that
you're interested in I/O happening on.
And then your process is put to sleep.
Waiting for anything to
happen on any of those file
descriptors and when it wakes up,
is told something has happened
on this file descriptor.
So just the basic select loop mechanism
is much more efficient that way.
We've implemented a source compatible
with the 3SB version of KQs,
but we've also extended the
mechanism a bit by introducing
additional event filter classes.
And one of the classes is a Mach port
filter class that will tell you whether
some message has arrived on a Mach port.
And another one tells you about
things happening in the system.
For instance,
whether file systems get mounted or
unmounted anywhere in the system,
if one of those events happens,
your KQ would get an
event delivered to it.
The one thing to keep in mind about KQs,
and part of the reason why they're
so efficient in the kernel,
is that it's not an actual
queue of individual discrete
events being notified to you,
but rather a single notification
that some condition has come
to be true in the system.
So, you wouldn't get ten little
events saying three bytes are
available at your file descriptor,
five more are available
on this file descriptor,
ten more.
You would get a single event
that says there's data available
on this file descriptor.
That's something to be
mindful of in the model.
It's not supported on all volume formats
because the implementation does require
support inside the file system itself.
And if you are a client
to a network file server,
you should be mindful that
you may get notifications,
but you will only get them about
the local events happening,
going out to that file server.
Not necessarily all the other things
all the other clients of that server
are doing on the server itself.
Those are two things to keep in mind.
And when you open a file
descriptor on a directory,
for instance, to request notifications
about that directory,
there is a flag you should set,
"O Event Only," which says that
this file descriptor is going to be
used strictly for event delivery.
Because that will let
the system correctly,
decide at unmount time whether a
file system is truly busy or not.
So to avoid file descriptors that
are open solely for the purposes
of notification from preventing
you from unmounting a file system,
if you set OEvent only on the open,
the file system will let
the unmount go ahead anyway.
So OEvent only is one
to be very mindful of.
Overall, unfortunately,
despite the best efforts of
the higher level frameworks,
there are lots of capabilities that are
very specific to individual file systems.
And if you rely on some
particular behavior in the system,
you should probably check beforehand
whether the particular file system
you're operating on supports that.
And there's a variety of
ways that that can be done.
There are get-out-of-list variants
that will tell you something about the
capabilities of a certain volume format.
At the Carbon level,
there's the get-vol parms calls.
But be mindful of it and either
test ahead of time or even better,
be prepared with a fallback option
in case the behavior you need is not
supported by the particular file system.
But with that caveat,
make use of all the file system
special capabilities that you want.
If you're worried about some of the
tools that you all have available,
One that I find myself using on an
at least daily basis is FS Usage.
It's a great tool that lets
you monitor all the file
system activity in the system.
And you can constrict it to
a particular application,
or you can monitor everything that's
happening in the whole system.
If you want to find, for instance,
who it is that's writing a certain
file or creating a certain something,
and you find out the file
system call that's made,
the process that made it,
what the results of the call were,
so you can see errors happening.
If some application is throwing
up its hands without any clear
indication of what's going wrong,
you can run FS Usage and see what kind
of file system errors it's getting.
It's a great tool.
SC Usage does the same thing
for other system calls.
The features have been somewhat
expanded in Tiger since the last
release you may be familiar with,
so it's worth checking out the -f option.
And if you run with the debug
versions of the system frameworks,
you'll get tracing at that level.
So you'll find out not just
that a stat call is being made,
but that the application is
calling get catalog info,
which is causing the
stat call to be made.
So it's good stuff.
Top is another great tool to get a
quick look at sort of at a very high
level what's going on in the system.
You see all the running processes.
You'll see who's using CPU time,
who's making system calls,
because you can see the
context switches happening.
There's some summary information that'll
tell you the paging rates in the system,
the number of I/Os that are happening,
how busy the system is.
It's great for just sort
of getting a feel for,
hey, the system's a little sluggish,
what's going on.
You find some app that's
pegged at 99% of the CPU time,
you've got your suspect to go look at it.
Time is a great command line tool
that will just count I/Os and
tell you how much I/O is done,
how much user time and how much
system time is taken as part
of executing a certain process.
If you're setting about
optimizing your application,
monitoring both of those
is interesting to do.
Sample is great for looking where
a process is spending its time.
There are more powerful
profiling tools available,
like Shark, which is part of the Chud
tools that you can install.
But Sample, especially when you
think a process is stuck,
is a great,
quick command line tool to get
a look at what the current stack
frame is in another process.
And finally, LSOF will tell you about all
the open files in the system.
So if you can't eject a volume
because some file is busy,
LSOF can tell you who has it open.
Or if you want to find out what
files an application is keeping open,
you can find out through LSOF.
Those are just some of the tools.
There are specific sessions that were
devoted to doing performance analysis
and profiling of your tools that
are very much worth looking into.
But FS Usage is one of my favorites.
Shark is definitely worth checking out.
I think there's a session on
Friday devoted just to Shark,
for instance.
So check it out.
For more information in general,
you can contact Jason Yeo.
And there are also some resources.
on the DVD and online that will
tell you more about the particular
file system or in general,
software design guidelines.